---
title: "The BCHS Stack"
date: 2024-04-09T12:43:16-04:00
draft: false
---

Original Source: [Learn BCHS](https://learnbchs.org/index.html "Learn BCHS")

## BSD, C, httpd, SQLite

BCHS is an open source software stack for web applications. To prepare a BCHS environment, install [OpenBSD](https://www.openbsd.org/ "OpenBSD"), start your editor of choice, and get to work.

Get used to minimalism and security: componentised, privilege-separated binaries in file-system jails. Most of all, forget your instincts to search Google and StackExchange for every parameter and function call: man pages are your new best friend.

## Stack components

### BSD

OpenBSD. World-renowned for its focus on security and documentation. Reliable six-month releases. Binary patching. It takes the guess-work out of your environment.

### C

C is a straightforward, non-mustachioed language. It has full access to the kernel's system calls and a massive set of development tools and libraries.

### HTTPD

OpenBSD's home-grown web server. If you need more features for your web application, submit a patch.

### SQLITE

SQLite is a self-contained, embeddable, zero-configuration database. It's a practical solution for the majority of database needs. Just pkg_add sqlite3 and you're ready.

### Hello World Example

#### cgi.c

What’s going on? pledge(2) makes sure you’re only doing what you want to do: work with existing descriptors. The rest is just HTTP. Don’t want to work with HTTP? Use kcgi(3) or equivalent.

`````
#include <err.h> /* err(3) */
#include <stdlib.h> /* EXIT_xxxx */
#include <stdio.h> /* puts(3) */
#include <unistd.h> /* pledge(2) */

int
main(void)
{
    if (pledge("stdio", NULL) == -1) 
        err(EXIT_FAILURE, "pledge");
    puts("Status: 200 OK\r");
    puts("Content-Type: text/html\r");
    puts("\r");
    puts("Hello, world!\n");
    return EXIT_SUCCESS;
}
`````

#### httpd.conf

httpd.conf(5) is so… simple. Server tells us the name. Listen tells us to listen. Location tells us a location. Where we have FastCGI. Relative to the root.

`````
ext_addr="*"

server "localhost" {
    listen on $ext_addr port 80
    location "/cgi-bin/*" {
        fastcgi
        root "/"
    }
}
`````

#### setup
`````
#! /bin/sh
cc -static -g -W -Wall -Wextra -o cgi cgi.c
doas install -o www -g www -m 0500 cgi /var/www/cgi-bin
doas rcctl enable slowcgi
doas rcctl start slowcgi
doas rcctl check slowcgi
doas rcctl restart httpd
`````

### Additional Examples

- [Secure CGI Applications in C](https://kristaps.bsd.lv/absdcon2016/ "Secure CGI Applications in C")
- [BSD and Secure CGI](https://kristaps.bsd.lv/absdcon2017/ "BSD and Secure CGI")

