---
title: "Adding an Existing Laravel Sail Project on to a VM"
date: 2024-02-08T16:46:21-05:00
draft: false
---

These are some of the steps used to cloning a laravel sail project from a git repository on to a virtual machine for testing purposes. This exercise is good for testing server production for a project.

### Setting up a Linux enviornment
For this project, we are using Rocky Linux. The minimal install is reccomended. Once the installation is complete there are some tools that are needed; these include the following: git, docker + docker, compose

To install git run the following command:
`````
sudo dnf install git
`````

To install docker on Rocky linux, run the following commands to add the repo and then run the installer:
`````
sudo dnf config-manager --add-repo https://download.docker.com/linux/centos/docker-ce.repo
sudo dnf -y install docker-ce docker-ce-cli containerd.io docker-compose-plugin
sudo systemctl --now enable docker
`````

Once Docker is installed, it is important to establish a non-root user into the Docker group to avoid running docker with the `sudo` prefix; this can avoid complications later. To add a non root user to the group follow the below commands:
`````
sudo groupadd docker
sudo usermod -aG docker $USER
newgrp docker
`````

You can verify that this worked by running a general docker command like: `docker --version` without the super user prefix.


### Cloning the Project
Once the docker enviornment is setup, you can now clone the desired project. 

Using git, run the following command in the desired project folder:
`````
https://github.com/{username}/{repository}.git
`````

Replace username with the owner of the repository and replace the repository keyword with the actual project name. You can then navigate into the folder:
`````
cd {repository-name}
`````

## Setting up a .env file
By default, a typical project won't include its .env file for security reasons. For your local enviornment you can copy the .env.example file into a .env file which will connect the endpoints such as the `DB_NAME/DB_HOST` to your application.

A quick way to do this is run the command from within the app folder:
`````
cp .env.example .env
`````

### Pull the Dependencies to Run Sail
You may install the application's dependencies by navigating to the application's directory and executing the following command. This command uses a small Docker container containing PHP and Composer to install the application's dependencies:
`````bash
docker run --rm \
    -u "$(id -u):$(id -g)" \
    -v "$(pwd):/var/www/html" \
    -w /var/www/html \
    laravelsail/php83-composer:latest \
    composer install --ignore-platform-reqs
`````
Note, you will need to replace php83 with the version that is found within the docker-compose file. For example, if the version is `php-8.2` then you will need to use `php82-composer:latest`


### Default Docker Context
If you are using Docker Desktop for Linux, you should use the default Docker context by executing the following command:
`````
docker context use default
`````


#### Setting an Alias
To avoid retypping the vendor path for each execution, an alias is reccomended for running sail commands. This can be done like so:
`````
alias sail='[ -f sail ] && sh sail || sh vendor/bin/sail'
`````


### Adding a Firewall Exception
By default, your firewall will likely block port 80/8080/8000 which will prevent your application from displaying when accessing the ip externally. A workaround is to add an exception. Save the following into a bash script file like `execute.sh` and then run.

You can replace the service name with whatever you prefer:
`````
YOURPORT=8080
PERM="--permanent"
SERV="$PERM --service=laravel"

firewall-cmd $PERM --new-service=laravel
firewall-cmd $SERV --set-short="Laravel ports"
firewall-cmd $SERV --set-description="Laravel port exceptions"
firewall-cmd $SERV --add-port=$YOURPORT/tcp
firewall-cmd $PERM --add-service=laravel
firewall-cmd --zone=public --add-service=http --permanent
firewall-cmd --reload
`````


## Running the Sail Containers
Before running and building the sail containers, make sure there are no other running volumes from docker compose. Skipping this step can involve an error such as `Unable to setup unix socket lock file` when running the sail containers.

First shutdown existing volumes:
`````
docker compose down --volumes
`````

Next, build the sail containers:
`````
sail up --build -d
`````

The `-d` variable will allow the sail containers to run in the background. This is optional however in the next step we will be using bash within the containers thus you will either need to do this in a seperate terminal session or the existing one with the `-d` option.


## Bash into Sail
Run the following command to access into the sail container for the application:
`````
sail bash
`````

This will log you into the container where you will need to run a series of commands to set up the enviornment. First, you will need to generate a new key for your `.env` setup. This is the file that you copied from the sample file. Since this setup will be unique on your system, it will require a unique identifier. To this run the following command:
`````
php artisan key:generate
`````

Next, you will need to run the migration in order to populate the database with the correct schema for the application. This can be done by running the following:
`````
php artisan migrate
`````

Once that is finished, the front-end utilities will need to be installed. By default, node and npm will already be available in the container (these are included via the Docker setup). To run the installation simple run the following command.
`````
npm install
`````
This will pull of the existing dependencies listed on the .json file for the node modules. 


### Production / Dev Build
If this project is being served from a vm or server for production-use, run the build command. For dev use, simply run the dev command.
`````bash
# production build
npm run build  

# developer build
npm run dev
`````
Once the front-end is build you will be able to review the site on your local host or external ip. To find your ip you can run the following:
`````
hostname -I
`````


### Additional Resources
These resources can help if errors are encountered. Depending on your linux setup there may be issues in setting up the correct docker configuration or server settings. <br/>
[Sail Documentation](https://laravel.com/docs/10.x/sail#installing-sail-into-existing-applications "Sail Documentation")<br/>
[MySql+Docker Issues](https://rawbinn.com/blog/mysql-not-starting-on-docker "MySQL+Docker Issues")<br/>
[SF Cloning Laravel Project](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/38437072/setup-laravel-project-after-cloning "SF Cloning Laravel Project")<br/>
[SF PId Unix Error for Sql](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/36103721/docker-db-container-running-another-process-with-pid-id-is-using-unix-socket "SF PId Unix Error for Sql")<br/>


